Advances in computer technology have allowed data scientists to analyze vast troves of information and to use them to find patterns that were previously unattainable. This new science has been used to allow computer programs to master the TV gameshow Jeopardy, to defeat world class experts at chess, and to more accurately diagnose certain cancers.
At the same time, in courtrooms across the United States, judges and juries devote millions of man-hours to making estimates of their own. Their work is nearly identical to the 20th Century version, and has great similarities to their work in the 19th and 18th Centuries as well.  Often, their role is to hear evidence and to decide whether the person accused of causing an injury by their carelessness was acting reasonably.  In personal injury cases, when a person creates a harm that a reasonable person would not and causes someone else to suffer injuries. In 1882, Oliver Wendell Holmes described the standard of reasonable care as : “what would be blameworthy in the average man, the man of ordinary intelligence and prudence...” 
The argument this Essay supports is that, in many situations, what an "average person" would do is calculable, and calculable to a degree unthinkable to twelve untrained jurors basing a decision on trial testimony and exhibits.  
This approach is fraught with challenges, but also has potential to vastly improve the functioning of the legal system by providing more fair and accurate results, saving costs, and relieving juries from having to leave aside their work to appear at a trial.

To explain the ideas, this Essay uses a case familiar to most first year law students; and also includes an appendix theorizing how a case of the future could be decided.

The TJ Hooper v. Northern Barge, 53 F.2d 107 (S.D.N.Y. 1931)

A Depression Era case involving tug boats lays out both the opportunity, and the challenges of this approach. In TJ Hooper, a company operated two tugs, each towing three barges full of coal for delivery. En route, the tugs encountered a storm which sank the last barge of each tug's tow. The evidence suggested that there was a weather report broadcast over radio which would have warned the tug captains of the weather and persuaded them to put into harbor. However, the tug captains only had private radio receiving sets which were broken and their employer did not furnish them with sets for work. At the time of the incident, there was no industry standard or custom of furnishing all boats with radio receivers.
First legal issue: was there an industry standard in place at the time defining what a reasonable tug owner would have done with respect to radios? 
In the original TJ Hooper case, the court found that there was no industry standard requiring supplying tug boats with radios at the time of the accident.  Instead, it found “no custom at all as to receiving sets; some had them, some did not; the most that can be urged is that they had not yet become general.” Put differently (and without supplying specifics or quantifiable support), the court found that the average tug boat industry member had not yet supplied boats with radios because some did and some did not  This might have been the right decision, but there is little support that it was reached in the right way, given that a “standard” can be calculable as long as society is willing to define a numerical range for what is and is not standard.
Now imagine if that case had been decided in the age of data science. For sake of ease, let's assume there is only 1 manufacturer of radio equipment suitable for maritime use, and that the company uses modern customer relations management tools to help their sales team succeed (which includes a robust system for capturing information about sales leads and current customers). With a subpoena to this manufacturer, it would be possible to obtain their complete list of customers within the tugboat industry.  It would include the number of radios, the dates on which they were purchased, and the location of the companies.  In the actual TJ Hooper case, the court merely concedes there was no industry standard.  Here, though, it could be knowable in an instant that only 1% of tug boats had purchased radios.
If that were true, given Holmes's definition of the reasonable person standard (which, in the TJ Hooper case would mean a reasonable company), it would be simple work to establish that the average tug boat owner of ordinary prudence would not, at the time of the incident, have had a radio on board.
Significantly, note that if it was known ahead of time that this was the relevant standard, all of this work could be done without a judge or jury.  Simply put, if a reasonable person is “average,” then it’s a matter of having data and being able to do simply arithmetic to determine if the standard is met.  If we, as a society, were willing to empower this algorithm to render decisions (with a right of appeal - more on that below), then the entire machinery involving the human element of the court system would never need to be engaged.  
Second legal issue: absent an industry standard, was the defendant’s conduct still unreasonable in failing to supply working radios?
The complexity of the negligence standard expresses itself 
 
fn1 Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Common Law 108 (1882)
#####
 
Appendix: A Science Fiction Story for the Legal Reader
Suffolk County, Massachusetts. December 2033.
A commuter dashes across an outdoor subway platform on a sleety, cold winter day, in an effort to board the last car before the doors close. Just feet away from the train, she slips and falls on an ice patch, suffering serious injuries. After being released from the hospital, she contacts a lawyer, who believes the subway operator “breached its duty of due care by failing to make safe the icy and snowy conditions that existed on the platform.” In its defense, the subway operator claims that, not only did it act reasonably, but that the plaintiff’s claim should be barred because “her contributory negligence in failing to act as a reasonable person under the circumstances [by running across an icy platform] was the sole cause of her injuries.” The trial is a brief one, occurring just weeks after the plaintiff’s medical course had ended. On the day of the trial, the attorneys walk with their clients into the courthouse and approach the CompuJury kiosk, where they upload a thumb drive full of evidence. They then look solemnly at their clients and plaintiff’s counsel presses the “DECIDE” button. CompuJury deliberates for a full 6 seconds, before printing a verdict slip stating that the defendant was 100% negligent and that the plaintiff was 0% comparatively at fault. The back of the CompuJury form (which is a key part of the record for the human-based appellate tribunal) explained the decision’s basis: After reviewing the evidence contained on the thumb drive (which contained answers to interrogatories, deposition transcripts of the parties and other witnesses, as well as video footage of more than 6,000 commuters crossing the platform that day), CompJury could project how a reasonable person would walk on the platform. As programmed (and this programming was based on an act of the state legislature deciding the parameters), it defined “reasonable” as whether one was within 30-70% of the median for speed, walking stability, and focus on the task of at hand for an individual of the age and health of the plaintiff. In making its decision, CompuJury explained, the plaintiff, though moving a little faster than average, and being slightly more distracted than average (she had her iPhone in hand, but was not looking at it), she was in the 35% percentile for reasonability based on the how others conducted themselves. The plaintiff was, therefore, within the margin by which no fault would attach. With respect to the defendant, it found that the defendant had behaved unreasonably because, under similar circumstances, similar ice patches to the one on which the plaintiff slipped were cleared within 10 minutes, but the plaintiff’s ice patch had been there a full 30 minutes (“reasonably speed” to cure the harm would have been 8-20 minutes, said the system). It also reviewed industry standards in its database and found that several national organizations said that no ice patch should ever be allowed to exist in an area traversed by customers for more than 15 minutes.
Before leaving the CompuJury kiosk, one more piece of paper came from the machine: a slip of paper for the parties to upload into DamagesBot as the next phase of the trial, along with medical records, bills, and the plaintiff’s discovery responses about the impact of her injuries on her life. For another small fee, DamagesBot would be immediately available to render a decision on the plaintiff’s present and future medical costs, as well as to assess her non-economic damages based on surveys from community members about the value of various injuries in various contexts.
 
